---
layout: paper
title: Genetic Complexity in a <em>Drosophila</em> Model of Diabetes-Associated Misfolded Human Proinsulin
image: 
authors: Park SY <sup><i class="fa fa-asterisk"></i></sup>, Ludwig MZ <sup><i class="fa fa-asterisk"></i></sup>, Tamarina NA, <strong>He BZ</strong>, Carl SH, Dickerson DA, Barse L, Arun B, Williams CL, Miles CM, Philipson LH, Steiner DF, Bell GI, Kreitman M <sup><i class="fa fa-envelope"></i></sup>.
year: 2014
ref: Park et al. 2014, Genetics
journal: "Genetics. 196(2):539-55"
pdf: /pdfs/papers/Park-genetics-2014.pdf
supplement: /pdfs/papers/Park-genetics-2014-supp.pdf
image:
doi: 10.1534/genetics.113.157602
pmid: 24281154
category: papers
---

### Abstract ###

The identification and validation of gene-gene interactions is a major challenge in human studies. Here, we explore an approach for studying epistasis in humans using a Drosophila melanogaster model of neonatal diabetes mellitus. Expression of the mutant preproinsulin (hINS(C96Y)) in the eye imaginal disc mimics the human disease: it activates conserved stress-response pathways and leads to cell death (reduction in eye area). Dominant-acting variants in wild-derived inbred lines from the Drosophila Genetics Reference Panel produce a continuous, highly heritable distribution of eye-degeneration phenotypes in a hINS(C96Y) background. A genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 154 sequenced lines identified a sharp peak on chromosome 3L, which mapped to a 400-bp linkage block within an intron of the gene sulfateless (sfl). RNAi knockdown of sfl enhanced the eye-degeneration phenotype in a mutant-hINS-dependent manner. RNAi against two additional genes in the heparan sulfate (HS) biosynthetic pathway (ttv and botv), in which sfl acts, also modified the eye phenotype in a hINS(C96Y)-dependent manner, strongly suggesting a novel link between HS-modified proteins and cellular responses to misfolded proteins. Finally, we evaluated allele-specific expression difference between the two major sfl-intronic haplotypes in heterozygtes. The results showed significant heterogeneity in marker-associated gene expression, thereby leaving the causal mutation(s) and its mechanism unidentified. In conclusion, the ability to create a model of human genetic disease, map a QTL by GWAS to a specific gene, and validate its contribution to disease with available genetic resources and the potential to experimentally link the variant to a molecular mechanism demonstrate the many advantages Drosophila holds in determining the genetic underpinnings of human disease. 
