---
layout: misc
title: postdoc
---

Application through [Jobs@UIowa](https://jobs.uiowa.edu/postdoc/view/3397)

The Gene Regulatory Evolution (GRE) Lab (<https://binhe-lab.org>) led by Dr. Bin He is hiring a postdoctoral researcher to work on the *evolution of stress response* in multiple clades of independently evolved commensal and opportunistic yeast pathogens in the same group as the model yeast *S. cerevisiae*. The postdoc position will be funded by an NIH MIRA grant (R35GM137831) aimed at understanding the principles governing the evolution of stress response gene regulatory networks (GRNs) and its application in the evolution of fungal pathogens. Opportunistic fungal infections have become increasingly a threat in the ICU and senior living facilities, due to the limited types of antifungal drugs and emergence of new drug-resistant species. The postdoctoral training will involve working with a variety of model and non-model yeast species, conducting biochemical, functional genomics and single-cell measurements to understand the evolutionary changes and consequences in the stress response GRNs. 

Qualified candidates should hold a Ph.D. in evolutionary biology, molecular genetics, microbiology or related fields. Basic skills in statistics and bioinformatics are expected. Experience in fungal genetics, animal models for fungal pathogens, conducting and analyzing large-scale sequencing results are highly desirable, but the candidate need not have expertise in all of those fields. Training with the PI and other local and national experts will be a critical part of this job. While initially the postdoc will work on projects laid out in the grant, she or he will have the latitudes to develop her/his own idea in the latter part of the training.

The GRE lab is part of a diverse and active group of 28 research labs in the Biology Department at the University of Iowa, which provides a unique integrative environment. We work closely with multiple core facilities and experts in transcriptional regulation and fungal pathogenesis, thus allowing the postdoc candidate to quickly get into technically challenging fields. The Principal Investigator, Dr. Bin He, obtained his Ph.D. from the Department of Ecology and Evolution at the University of Chicago, and completed his postdoctoral training with Dr. Erin O'Shea at the FAS Center for Systems Biology at Harvard University in 2017. The lab is committed to fostering a welcoming, supportive
environment. Last but not least, Iowa City is a great place to live in. It is consistently ranked among the top five college towns in the US. Home to one of seven UNESCO cities of literature, it has a live culture, with great art and music, and a vibrant food scene, and is very affordable.

To apply, please use this [link](https://jobs.uiowa.edu/postdoc/view/3397) to send your up-to-date CV, 2-3 reference letters and a cover letter briefly explaining your interest in the research. Informal inquiries can be sent to [bin-he@uiowa.edu](mailto:bin-he@uiowa.edu). Review of applications will begin immediately and will continue until the position is filled. Start date is flexible and can be negotiated with the PI.
